On Sunday, one of the year’s most fascinating television events will come to a close when “Twin Peaks: The Return” airs its two-hour finale. It’s now apparent that the show’s co-creators, David Lynch and Mark Frost, had something very different in mind than a simple sequel series. Until this week’s episode, the original show’s beloved main character, the F.B.I. agent Dale Cooper (Kyle MacLachlan) was nowhere to be found. Sort of. It’s complicated. Since Mr. Lynch has straddled the TV-movie divide for much of his career, The New York Times TV and movie critics James Poniewozik and Manohla Dargis met above a certain convenience store to discuss the first 16 hours of “The Return.” “Finally!” – to quote one of the most perfectly timed jokes of this glorious season. They called this series, “Twin Peaks: The Return.” I don’t think we realized it was going to be more like “The Eternal Return.” It was 16 episodes before the Dale Cooper we knew rematerialized. He was Odysseus, but instead of on a ship, he was waylaid in the life of one Douglas (Dougie) Jones of Las Vegas.It was a hell of a payoff. Mr. MacLachlan shows you Cooper before he speaks a word — his eyes popping eagerly open, shaking off the Dougie Novocain. Was it too late? I don’t think so, but then I wasn’t too interested in “Twin Peaks” cranking up its old hits in the first place. TV is drowning in revivals and reboots. They always serve two masters: the pull of nostalgia and the drive to make something new. I’ve been pleasantly surprised how novel this has been: a new work from Mr. Lynch and Mr. Frost, with its own aesthetic (and memorable new performances from the likes of Laura Dern).Of course I love the original series and the characters. But what I’ve enjoyed most is not when “The Return” made me say, “Aw, it’s so nice to see that/him/her again.” It’s when the show made me say — as it has, over and over — “Wow, I’ve never seen that before.” The sooty Woodsman intoning poetry while crushing a man’s skull, the woman with eyes sewn shut, the void behind Sarah Palmer’s face: It’s good to see Mr. Lynch’s coffee has not been switched to decaf. While I was finishing “The Return,” I flashed on Terry Gilliam’s original Monty Python show and the man who has this stuff flying out of his topped-off head. This shouldn’t be surprising — it’s been 11 years since “Inland Empire,” Mr. Lynch’s last significant theatrically distributed movie, and he seems to have built up a storehouse of ideas and images. Some of these were familiar Lynchian fixations, including the allusions to “The Wizard of Oz,” with its different yet familiar alternative world, those terrifying vortexes and all those ruby slippers. (I lost count of how many women wore red shoes.) He took us over his rainbow again.I love that he and Mr. Frost assumed we would go along for the ride, no matter what the detours. What I especially love is that they assumed that we would (could) be open to the ineffable, something that seems rare in a brand-driven, franchise-happy entertainment world. If the first two seasons ostensibly hinged on the question of who killed Laura Palmer (answered again in Mr. Lynch’s brilliant 1992 film “Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me”), this season the mystery shifted to the series itself: What’s going on here and why? What is this world, inside the box and out? The “what’s going on here” of “The Return” comes wrapped in (sometimes literally) head-popping surrealism. But I don’t think it’s hard to watch. There’s logic; it just happens to be dream logic. The core story is simple. There’s Dale, spirited away for 25 years. There’s his doppelgänger, who eluded the Black Lodge by copying himself like a set of keys. And there ain’t room in this here plane of existence for the both of them.That’s the setup of a Western, a label I would not have applied to the first “Twin Peaks.” But “The Return” has that flavor, not just from Evil Cooper swaggering in black like a wicked Johnny Cash. (He’s been everywhere, man.) “The Return” is big. It’s fixated on America’s awesome and terrifying expanse, in the sweep of locations, in all that imagery of headlights on dusty roads at night. It’s also horror, sci-fi, a screwball comedy and of course a reunion — one inflected bittersweetly by real-world deaths (including Catherine E. Coulson, Warren Frost, Miguel Ferrer and David Bowie). How does it feel to go home? Well, golly, to quote the Lady in the Radiator, the strange siren from Mr. Lynch’s “Eraserhead”: “In heaven/Everything is fine/In heaven.” Here on earth it’s an entirely different matter. Here, as he reminds us again and again, women are exploited, tortured and murdered, and children are sacrificed – they’re preyed on, run down in the streets and forced to witness the unspeakable. And to live means to live with the unspeakable. It’s no wonder that Gordon, the F.B.I. man whom Mr. Lynch plays (and who, in his decency, serves a stand-in for the old Cooper), has a photo of a nuclear explosion on one wall and a picture of Kafka –another master of alienation – on another. It’s no wonder, too, that we put on our masks and assume roles, playing cops and demons, naughty girls and motorcycle boys. The scene with Wally Brando (Michael Cera), like so many this season, opens like Pandora’s box: it’s a nod at the impossibly young, beautiful Brando in the 1953 film “The Wild One”; it namechecks Brando’s close friend, Wally Cox; and invokes the old James Hurley, the pouter in a leather jacket who rode through season one and two on a Harley. James was always an amusing take on masculine cool, the one riding on that dark, lonely Lynchian highway. Wally Brando may look like a cartoon of cool, but he’s also the cartoon we see in our mirrors. Let’s get meta. We have a film critic and a TV critic discussing “The Return.” So which genre is it? Mr. Lynch has said: “It’s a film. It’s broken into parts.” It had a premiere at Cannes. And the boundary between the genres has always been porous for Mr. Lynch: “Mulholland Drive” began as a busted ABC pilot, the eerie rabbit-folk of “Inland Empire” as a web sitcom. But I say it’s TV, dammit, and not just because I resist the idea that TV should be grateful for the compliment. (The original “Twin Peaks” was openly and happily TV, using the tropes of soap opera and crime drama.) “The Return” is episodic, even if its structure is free-form. It’s built for weekly airing and digestion, keeping each new episode shrouded in secrecy — much like “Mad Men,” which Mr. Lynch has admired. “The Return” benefits from a unified voice, with Mr. Lynch directing every episode and writing with Mr. Frost. But auteuristic TV is more common now than in 1990. This show is different from anything else, but in vision, not in kind. One legacy of the first “Twin Peaks” is it helped shape a medium that now has room for “The Return.” Mr. Lynch can call “The Return” what he wants; he’s David Lynch! (You can call it TV; you’re James Poniewozik!) It’s irrelevant for an artist who consistently defies easy explanations, familiar narrative forms and the usual interpretive moves. That’s part of his brilliance, and the deep pleasure of his work. We can read him this way or that, dust off some Freud, riffle through the surrealists, click our heels together and invoke history: Mr. Lynch was born in 1946, for instance, a year after the first atom bomb was detonated, a horrific landmark directly cited in “The Return.” Like everyone else, he has lived under that existential threat ever since. I wish the first “Twin Peaks” had shaped the medium more. It needs it. I say that not because I’m a film snob (though of course I am); it’s that most movies and television are so formulaic. I like and love some of it, obviously. But critics can slice and dice most contemporary big-and-small screen entertainment, even the most distinctly auteur-driven and ambitious, into neat, tidy explanatory boxes. A show like “Mad Men,” which I also admire, lays itself out like a map; we knew how to read it almost at once. It seems instructive that “The Return” doesn’t use the TV conventions you mention. It isn’t a self-aware riff on the turning, churning worlds of daytime soaps. At the same time, it often felt that Mr. Lynch and Mr. Frost were directly engaging with television and its audience, sometimes with humorous asides. At other times, this engagement turned more confrontational, like that scene with that enigmatic box and its somewhat dim viewers who sit cozily down to watch it only to lose their heads. I laughed. Did you? Mr. Lynch recently declared his love for watching car-customizing shows on the Velocity channel. I’m not sure he judges! “The Return” is, like its predecessor, a funny show. (One long word: “Hell-o-ooo!”) But it’s also, as you say, different. “Twin Peaks” used a crime mystery to lure viewers onto the road to the unconscious. “The Return,” which doesn’t need to draw an ABC-sized audience (its viewership is small even by pay-cable standards), takes the express lane. In “Twin Peaks,” the hook was Laura Palmer; in “The Return,” the hook is “Twin Peaks.” Am I a bad person if I say Twin Peaks, the setting, has been the weakest part of the new series for me? I love these characters, and I’m glad the Roadhouse hired a great booking agent. But the reintroductions have often felt disjointed and obligatory. I like when “The Return” pushes against the easy gratification of remember-when. Take the return of Audrey Horne’s dance: it begins sentimental, turns spooky, then ends abruptly, like waking from — or into — a nightmare. Maybe the best way to think of “The Return” is neither as TV nor movies but visual art. (Mr. Lynch was a painter before a director.) “The Return” could have just been a crowd-pleasing museum retrospective. Instead, it’s a new collection, from artists who’ve kept evolving their craft even as they revisit their eternal motifs. You’re not a bad person, Jim. It’s just that Mr. Lynch and Mr. Frost have other things in mind this time around and if Twin Peaks — as town, as idea — seems more attenuated than in the past it’s also because the world outside, with its astonishing mysteries and ghastly horrors, is far larger. All I know is that I need one of Dr. Amp’s gold-plated shovels. Mr. Lynch and Mr. Frost clearly know we’re neck-deep in the muck, and that everyone needs to start shoveling right now.
